# Influence of 17α-ethinylestradiol on DNA Methylation in Oysters

**Mackenzie R. Gavery and Steven B. Roberts**

---

## Background
Endocrine disrupting compounds are emerging environmental contaminants that threaten water quality and health of humans and wildlife worldwide. These compounds, many with structural similarities to hormones such as estrogen, affect endocrine pathways and can cause reproductive perturbations. These compounds enter aquatic ecosystems through a variety of sources including wastewater treatments facilities, septic systems, and industrial effluents.  While physiological effects of endocrine disruption have been described, it is becoming evident that our understanding of the biological pathways affected are incomplete and that alternative modes of action need to be explored.  One compound of concern is 17α-ethinylestradiol (EE<sub>2</sub>), the active constituent of the female contraceptive pill, has been reported at high concentrations in aquatic environments.  Data collected in 1999 – 2000, from US streams in 30 states, reported concentrations of EE<sub>2</sub> between 5 and 273 ng/L ([Kolpin et al. 2002](https://paperpile.com/c/Cxc6nU/83MW)).  Effects of EE<sub>2</sub> exposure include delayed sexual development, induction of vitellogenesis and feminization of males in both fish and bivalves ([Schultz et al. 2003; Andrew et al. 2010](https://paperpile.com/c/Cxc6nU/LraJ+nxcC)).  However, mechanisms underlying the response of bivalves is unclear.

Until recently, there has been limited research regarding the impacts of EDCs in aquatic invertebrate species such as molluscs.  This is in part due to the fact that less is known about the endocrine system in these organisms.  For example, evidence for a functional estrogen receptor, the canonical target of EDCs, has only been recently identified in bivalve molluscs ([Matsumoto et al. 2007](https://paperpile.com/c/Cxc6nU/eE1W)).  The bivalve ER appears to be a constitutive TF and does not bind estrogen.  Nevertheless, a number of studies have recently described reproductive and developmental disruption in molluscs exposed to EDCs. Larval *C.gigas* exposed to the estrogen mimic nonylphenol at days 7-8 post fertilization show long-term reproductive effects including a skewed sex ratio toward females, increased incidence of simultaneous hermaphroditism, and decreased gamete viability 10 months after the exposure ([Nice et al. 2003](https://paperpile.com/c/Cxc6nU/jACF)).  Additionally, increased hermaphroditism and skewed female:male sex ratios were also observed after exposure of adult Sydney rock oysters Saccostrea glomerata to the synthetic estrogen ethinylestradiol early in gametogenesis ([Andrew et al. 2010](https://paperpile.com/c/Cxc6nU/nxcC)).
 
